---
title: "Oriented Soft DNA Curtains for Single-Molecule Imaging"
collection: publications
date: 2021-03-23
venue: 'Langmuir'
authors: 'Aurimas Kopūstas, Šarūnė Ivanovaitė, Tomas Rakickas, Ernesta Pocevičiūtė, Justė Paksaitė, Tautvydas Karvelis, Mindaugas Zaremba, Elena Manakova, and Marijonas Tutkus'
paperurl: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.langmuir.1c00066
tagline: '- Research paper, Corresponding author'
doi: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.1c00066
type: DNA_protein
---

<h2> Abstract </h2>
<p align= "justify">
Over the past 20 years, single-molecule methods have become extremely important for biophysical studies. These methods, in combination with new nanotechnological platforms, can significantly facilitate experimental design and enable faster data acquisition. A nanotechnological platform, which utilizes a flow-stretch of immobilized DNA molecules, called DNA Curtains, is one of the best examples of such combinations. Here, we employed new strategies to fabricate a flow-stretch assay of stably immobilized and oriented DNA molecules using a protein template-directed assembly. In our assay, a protein template patterned on a glass coverslip served for directional assembly of biotinylated DNA molecules. In these arrays, DNA molecules were oriented to one another and maintained extended by either single- or both-end immobilization to the protein templates. For oriented both-end DNA immobilization, we employed heterologous DNA labeling and protein template coverage with the antidigoxigenin antibody. In contrast to single-end immobilization, both-end immobilization does not require constant buffer flow for keeping DNAs in an extended configuration, allowing us to study protein–DNA interactions at more controllable reaction conditions. Additionally, we increased the immobilization stability of the biotinylated DNA molecules using protein templates fabricated from traptavidin. Finally, we demonstrated that double-tethered Soft DNA Curtains can be used in nucleic acid-interacting protein (e.g., CRISPR-Cas9) binding assay that monitors the binding location and position of individual fluorescently labeled proteins on DNA.

